# Overview

The birth of classical mechanics occured during the Scientific Revolution of the 16<sup>th</sup> and 17<sup>th</sup> centuries.  Beginning with Galileo, and culminating in the foundational works of Isaac Newton, classical mechanics swept away the long-held but erroneous doctrine of Aristotelian mechanics, that had survived mostly unchallenged for almost two millenia.

Prior to this period, it was believed that the natural laws of the Universe could be ascertained by means of observation and pure reasoning.  There was very little emphasis on the testing of hypotheses by experimentation.  Galileo overturned this system by performing many detailed and precise experiments which showed that the reasoning of Aristotle was flawed.  For example, it was widely held that for any two free-falling objects of different mass, the object with the larger mass would fall faster that the other.  Galileo disproved this in a series of experiments which involved rolling objects down inclined planes.  His result -- all objects fall at the same rate, regardless of their mass.

The shift to rigorous experimentation and testing of hypotheses, rather than pure reasoning, was the beginning of modern-day physics, and modern science in general.  Classical mechanics is one of the oldest of the sciences, and asks questions about how and why objects move, and how they interact with each other.  It quantifies the concepts of motion, force, energy and momentum.  It is sometimes divided into two sub-disciplines: [kinematics](./kinematics.md) and [dynamics](./dynamics.md).  Kinematics describes *how* objects move, while dynamics describes *why* objects move.

The theories of classical mechanics have since been supplanted by more modern and accurate theories about the Universe, such as quantum mechanics and general relativity.  This does not mean that learning classical mechanics is a waste of time, as classical mechanics is still a very accurate approximation for the behaviour of the world that forms a human's experience.  The details of quantum mechanics are only important at the very small scale of atoms and molecules, whereas special and general relativity are only important in certain domains of astronomy and ultra-precise technologies such as the Global Positioning System (GPS).  The laws of classical mechanics still very much form the foundation of modern engineering of macroscopic objects, such as buildings, bridges, aircraft, cars; indeed, most man-made objects.  Therefore a solid understanding of classical mechanics is necessary for an understanding of the engineering disciplines.